# Attributes and Statistics

The capabilities of a [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) during [battle](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-battle) are represented by their [attributes](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-attribute), their [statistics](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-statistic), and their [abilities](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability).  Likewise, the abilities a player character can use are determined by the [job](../Characters/Jobs/) they occupy and its current rank, their [archetype](../Characters/Archetypes/), their [items](../The-Economy/The-Party-Inventory/), their [equipment](../The-Economy/Equipment/), and whatever [flex powers](../Characters/Character-Advancement#term-flex-power) they have taken during [character advancement](../Characters/Character-Advancement).

A character's stamina in battle is represented by two scores, their _<dfn id="term-hp">Hit Points</dfn>_ and their _<dfn id="term-mp">Mana Points</dfn>._  Throughout these rules, these will be shortened to <abbr title="hit points">HP</abbr> and <abbr title="mana points">MP</abbr>, respectively.  When a character is hit with an ability that counts as a [physical attack](../Combat-Rules/Attacking-and-Defending#term-physical-attack) or [magical attack](../Combat-Rules/Attacking-and-Defending#term-magical-attack), their HP is reduced by the calculated damage number.  When a character uses an ability that has an MP cost, their MP is reduced by that amount.  Character may never use an ability that costs more than their current MP, and a character's MP and HP can never go below zero.

## Attributes

The core of a character's capabilities are made up of their attributes, three numbers from 1 to 10 that measure their relative aptitude in a particular domain of action.
*  A character's _<dfn id="term-body">Body</dfn>_ is a measure of how adept they are at pushing their athletic abilities to the limit, from hand-eye coordination to endurance running.
*  A character's _<dfn id="term-mind">Mind</dfn>_ is a measure of how quick and able they are at intellectually challenging tasks, from logical debate to solving mathematical puzzles.
*  A character's _<dfn id="term-spirit">Spirit</dfn>_ is a representation of their strength of personality.  This governs their aptitude for social interactions, as well as their ability to empathize with others.

## Statistics

In [combat](../Combat-Rules/), a character's strengths and weaknesses are represented by 12 numbers known as their statistics.  Each statistic is either tied to a pool that they lose or gain depending on the situation, or a number that determines the probability that different outcomes will occur when they use their abilities in conjunction with the statistics of other characters.
*  A character's _<dfn id="term-health">Health</dfn>_ is their [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) maximum HP during combat.  It is equal to their Body times 5 plus the bonus they receive from their class at [tier](../Characters/Character-Creation#term-tier) 1.
*  A character's _<dfn id="term-initiative">Initiative</dfn>_ determines when they act in combat.  The higher their Initiative is, the sooner they act.  Their base Initiative is equal to their Mind times 2 plus the bonus they receive from their class at tier 1.
*  A character's _<dfn id="term-mana">Mana</dfn>_ is their base maximum MP during combat.  It is equal to their Spirit times 5 plus the bonus they receive from their class at tier 1.
*  Any physical attacks a character makes deal an amount of damage that is increased by their _<dfn id="term-physical-attack">Physical Attack</dfn>_ unless otherwise specified.  Their base Physical Attack is equal to the bonus given by their equipped weapon plus the bonus applied by their current job if there is one.
*  Any magical attacks a character makes deal an amount of damage that is increased by their _<dfn id="term-magical-attack">Magical Attack</dfn>_ unless otherwise specified.  Their base Magical Attack is equal to the bonus given by their equipped weapon plus the bonus applied by their current job if there is one.
*  Any physical damage a character receives is reduced by their _<dfn id="term-physical-defense">Physical Defense</dfn>._  Their base Physical Defense is equal to the bonus from their equipped armor plus the bonus from their current job if there is one.
*  Any magical damage a character receives is reduced by their _<dfn id="term-magical-defense">Magical Defense</dfn>._  Their base Magical Defense is equal to the bonus from their equipped armor plus the bonus from their current job if there is one.
*  A character's _<dfn id="term-evasion">Evasion</dfn>_ reduces the likelihood that they will be hit by either a physical or magical attack.  Their base Evasion is equal to the bonus from their equipped accessories plus the bonus from their current job if there is one.
*  A character's _Resistance_ increases the likelihood that they will resist [status-inflicting abilties](../Combat-Rules/Attacking-and-Defending#term-status-inflicting-ability).  Their base Resistance is equal to the bonus from their equipped accessories plus the bonus from their current job if there is one.
*  A character's _<dfn id="term-physical-accuracy">Physical Accuracy</dfn>_ increases their likelihood to hit an enemy with a physical attack.  Their base Physical Accuracy is equal to their Mind plus their Body.
*  A character's _<dfn id="term-magical-accuracy">Magical Accuracy</dfn>_ increases their likelihood to hit an enemy with a magical attack.  Their base Magical Accuracy is equal to their Spirit plus their Mind.
*  A character's _<dfn id="term-status-accuracy">Status Accuracy</dfn>_ increases their likelihood to inflict negative [statuses](../Combat-Rules/Statuses) on their targets.  Their base Status Accuracy is equal to their Body plus their Spirit.
