# Enemy Creation

[GMs](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-gm) who want to introduce enemies not included in the [Example Enemies](../Enemies/Example-Enemies/) section have a few options.  First, they could take a pre-existing enemy and change it superficially, either by altering its creature or [elemental types](../Combat-Rules/Elemental-Types#term-elemental-type) and the elemental types of its [abilities](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability) and then changing its name and appearance.  They could also take an existing enemy and change its abilities.  Whatever the GM decides, it is recommended that they not hew too closely to any one roster of "canon" enemies.  This is partially to maintain the sense of danger and discovery for [players](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player), and partially because learning about the abilities and [statistics](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-statistic) of the enemies that [player characters](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player-character) will face on the road is a core part of the experience of Last Odyssey.

*  The _<dfn id = "term-enemy-type">enemy type</dfn>_ of an enemy is a measure of its power relative to its [tier](../Characters/Character-Creation#term-tier).  _<dfn id = "term-normal-enemy">Normal</dfn>_ enemies are about as powerful as a player character, _<dfn id = "term-elite-enemy">Elite</dfn>_ enemies are a match for the entire [party](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-party), and _Antagonists_ are powerful bosses that are a serious challenge for any party.
*  The _<dfn id = "term-creature-type">creature type</dfn>_ of an enemy is a single word that best describes the type of living being they are in the context of the setting.  There are a few special items, such as weapons with the Slayer feature, that interact with an enemy's creature type.
*  An enemy's _elemental type_ determines the damage that different elemental attacks do to them.
*  An enemy's _tier_ indirectly determines their [combat](../Combat-Rules/) [statistics](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-statistic) by setting the number of [attribute](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-attribute) points available to allocate to determine their statistics.
*  _Aggression_ is a measure of how vicious an enemy is in close quarters, and contributes to an enemy's [Physical Attack](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-physical-attack), [Initiative](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-initiative), and [Physical Accuracy](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-physical-accuracy).
*  _Toughness_ is a measure of how much damage an enemy can take, and contributes to an enemy's [Physical Defense](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-physical-defense), [Resistance](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-resistance), and [Health](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-health).
*  _Magic_ is a measure of how adept an enemy is at dealing with magic, and contributes to an enemy's [Magical Attack](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-magical-attack), [Magical Defense](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-magical-defense), [Magical Accuracy](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-magical-accuracy), and [Mana](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-mana).
*  _Cunning_ is a measure of how clever and evasive an enemy is, and contributes to an enemy's [Evasion](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-evasion), [Magical Accuracy](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-magical-accuracy), and [Status Accuracy](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-status-accuracy), and [Initiative](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-initiative).

When creating a new enemy, the GM must spend a fixed amount of points on each of these attributes that depends on the enemy's tier and its enemy type.  At tier 1, Normal enemies have 6 points to distribute, Elite enemies have 8, and each [Form](../../Enemies/Antagonists#term-form) of an Antagonist has 10.  Each additional tier grants 2 more points to Normal enemies, 3 more points to Elite enemies, and 4 more points to Antagonists.  The minimum value that an enemy can have in each of their attributes is 0.  The maximum value that a Normal enemy can have in a given attribute is 10, the maximum value an Elite can have is 15, and the maximum that an Antagonist can have is 20.  In addition to attribute points, the Health, Mana, and Initiative of all enemies are adjusted by a number called the enemy's _<dfn id = "term-tier-multiplier">tier multiplier</dfn>._  The tier multipliers for a Normal enemy are 5 for their Health and Mana and 1 for their Initiative, Elites have multipliers of 10 for their Health and Mana and 2 for their Initiative, and Antagonists have 20 for their Health and Mana and 2 for their Initiative.

Once attribute points have been allocated, the enemy's combat statistics are determined by their attributes by the following formulae:
*  Health = (Toughness)x5 + (Tier)x(Tier Multiplier).
*  Mana = (Magic)x5 + (Tier)x(Tier Multiplier).
*  Initiative = (Aggression) + (Cunning) + (Tier)x(Tier Multiplier).
*  Physical Attack = (Aggression)x2.
*  Magical Attack = (Magic)x2.
*  Physical Defense = (Toughness).
*  Magical Defense = (Magic).
*  Evasion = (Cunning).
*  Resistance = (Toughness).
*  Physical Accuracy = (Aggression)x2.
*  Magical Accuracy = (Cunning) + (Magic).
*  Status Accuracy = (Cunning)x2.

Unlike player characters, enemies' maximum [HP](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-hp) and [Shell]((../Combat-Rules/Shells)) are distinct values.  The total combined HP plus Shell of a single enemy is equal to its Health, and the ratio of its HP to its Shell is equal to the ratio of its Toughness plus its Aggression to its Magic plus its Cunning.  For example, an enemy with an Aggression of 4, a Toughness of 5, a Magic of 3, and a Cunning of 3 would have HP equal to three fifths of its Health and Shell equal to two fifths of its Health.  If the value calculated isn't exact (and it often won't be) just round the enemy's Health and Shell to the nearest integer.  Once statistics are calculated, the GM can then adjust them if they like.  When doing so, they should remember that 1 point of Physical Defense, Magical Defense, Evasion, or Resistance is worth 2 points of Physical Attack, Magical Attack, Physical Accuracy, Magical Accuracy, Initiative, or Status Accuracy, and also worth 5 points of Health or Mana.

After setting the combat statistics of an enemy, the GM should then choose its abilities.  Normal enemies should get two abilities, and Elite enemies should get four, while every Form of an Antagonist can have as many as appropriate, although 6-10 is a good median range.  If the enemy does not have a [basic attack](../Combat-Rules/The-Combat-Round#term-basic-attack), they receive an extra ability.  Examples of enemy abilities can be drawn from the lists of abilities for [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) [jobs](../Characters/Jobs/) and [archetypes](../Characters/Archetypes/) and from the abilities of all other enemies in the [Example Enemies](../Enemies/Example-Enemies/) section of their tier or below.  In the case of character abilities, enemies can only have access to abilities associated with a Rank of an archetype or job equal to twice their tier.  In addition to active abilities, enemies may also have [passive](../Combat-Rules/Attacking-and-Defending#term-passive) abilities, which are extra effects that activate when certain conditions are met.  For example, an enemy might have an ability that makes them immune to water damage, or might gain the Focused [status](../Combat-Rules/Statuses) when they lose their Shell.  GMs are also encouraged to come up with passives on their own.

After an enemy's combat statistics and abilities have been determined, they are technically ready to be deployed into a [campaign](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-campaign).  However, GMs should remember that an enemy is a living entity that makes decisions based on imperatives other than [battle](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-battle) tactics.  The last thing they do, then, should be to determine the enemy's behavior.  At minimum, GMs should note down what other enemies they will fight alongside, if any, and what pattern of abilities they will use in combat.  For example, an enemy that is mindless and aggressive might attack any of their opponents in the [front row](../Combat-Rules/Starting-Battles#term-front-row) at random, while a group of enemies using squadron tactics will rotate out who is in the front row based on their remaining HP and Shell.  Once this is done, set the enemy's [item table](../Combat-Rules/Ending-Combat#term-item-table), and it is complete.

In total, GMs creating a new enemy should complete the following steps:
1.  Determine its tier and enemy type.
2.  Determine its creature type.'
3.  Determine its elemental type.
4.  Determine its attributes.
5.  Assign combat statistics based on the values of its attributes, and adjust as needed.
6.  Determine its abilities.
7.  Determine its item table.
8.  Determine its behavior in and out of combat.
