# Climate Modifiers

Some climates are more hostile than others.  If [GMs](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-gm) want to provide more variation and challenge to their [players](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player) while they travel along a [path](../../Exploration-Rules/Nodes-and-Paths#term-path), or if the region is in the grip of a [Monster](../../Enemies/Antagonists/Monsters), they can add one or more of the following modifiers to a given climate:
*  <dfn id = "term-mild">Mild</dfn>: the climate here is less volatile than usual.  Unless otherwise specified, instead of rolling the [outcome die](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-outcome-die) to determine the weather during the [Navigation Phase](../../Exploration-Rules/The-Travel-Round#term-navigation-roll), the GM will roll a 1d6 and then consult the [weather table](../../Exploration-Rules/Weather-and-Climate#term-weather-table).
*  <dfn id = "term-dangerous">Dangerous</dfn>: the climate here is more volatile than usual.  Unless otherwise specified, instead of rolling the outcome die to determine the weather during the Navigation Phase, the GM will roll a 1d6 and add 4 and then consult the weather table.
*  <dfn id = "term-subterranean">Subterranean</dfn>: this region or path is deep underground.  All effects due to glare or brightness are negated, but the [navigation difficulty](../../Exploration-Rules/Nodes-and-Paths#term-navigation-difficulty) is increased by 2 unless the players are able to maintain a light source.
*  <dfn id = "term-volcanic">Volcanic</dfn>: this area is home to high volcanic activity.  Every day, the GM will roll an additional outcome die when they roll on the weather table.  If they roll a 10 on this die, volcanic activity will be visible in the sky, obscuring the sun and negating any effects from brightness.  However, they will also have to resist a [status-inflicting](../../Combat-Rules/Attacking-and-Defending#term-status-inflicting-ability) [ability](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability) during the Navigation Phase with a [Status Accuracy](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-status-accuracy) equal to the navigation difficulty of the path that inflicts [Poisoned](../../Combat-Rules/Statuses#term-poisoned) on a hit unless they have proper protection.
*  <dfn id = "term-overgrown">Overgrown</dfn>: the path is choked with flora, making it difficult to advance forward.  The navigation difficulty is increased by 2.
*  <dfn id = "term-barren">Barren</dfn>: there is very little life here, or at least very little life that is well-suited to harboring humans.  The [Hunt](../../Exploration-Rules/The-Travel-Round#term-hunt-action) and [Gather](../../Exploration-Rules/The-Travel-Round#term-gather-action) [actions](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-action) are impossible during the [Camping Phase](../../Exploration-Rules/The-Travel-Round#term-camping-phase).
*  <dfn id = "term-artificial">Artificial</dfn>: the weather patterns here are determined by something more purposeful than the laws of physics.  The [Divine](../../Exploration-Rules/The-Travel-Round#term-divine-action) action is impossible during the Camping Phase, but the weather is deterministic rather than random, and players will be able to discover the pattern either through deduction or through gathering [Lore](../../Free-Play/Lore).
*  <dfn id = "term-burning">Burning</dfn>: this region is currently suffering from ongoing wildfires.  Every day, the GM will roll an additional outcome die when they roll on the weather table.  If they roll a 10 on this die, the [player characters](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player-character) will have to avoid a nearby fire, which takes the form of a status-inflicting ability during the Navigation Phase with a Status Accuracy equal to the navigation difficulty of the path that inflicts [Burned](../../Combat-Rules/Statuses#term-burned) on a hit against them.
*  <dfn id = "term-windy">Windy</dfn>: high winds scour this area, and make it more difficult to travel.  Players must wear a [Cloak](../../The-Economy/The-Player-Inventory/Travel-Items#term-cloak) of some variety every day or else take an amount of damage equal to the navigation difficulty of the path during the Navigation Phase.
*  <dfn id = "term-infested">Infested</dfn>: this area is crawling with enemies.  If the player characters do not encounter a natural hazard during the Encounter Phase, they will automatically run into an enemy encounter.
