# Equipment

A [character's](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) [base](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) [Physical](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-physical-attack) and [Magical Attack](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-magical-attack) and [Physical](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-physical-defense) and [Magical Defense](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-magical-defense) as well as their base [Evasion](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-evasion) and [Resistance](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-resistance) are affected by special items that they carry on their person into [combat](../../Combat-Rules/) called _<dfn id = "term-equipment">equipment</dfn>._  All [player characters](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player-character) can wear three types of equipment: weapons, which give bonuses to their base Magical and Physical Attack; armor, which gives bonuses to their base Physical and Magical Defense; and accessories, which give bonuses to their base Evasion and Resistance.

The potency of a piece of equipment is determined by its _<dfn id = "term-equipment-quality">Quality</dfn>._  There are four levels of Quality a piece of gear can have: Mundane, Rare, Expert, and Unique.  The first three levels give flat increases to the bonuses the respective piece of armor or weaponry provides to a character's [statistics](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-statistic).  In addition to a piece of equipment's basic stats, each one also has a number of attached extra effects known as _<dfn id = "term-equipment-upgrade">upgrades</dfn>,_ each of which has an associated _<dfn id = "term-upgrade-value">Upgrade Value</dfn>,_ or <abbr title = "upgrade value">UV number</abbr> for short.  The total sum of all of the UV numbers of the upgrades to a given weapon or armor set can never be greater than its total Upgrade Value.  Mundane equipment has a UV of 1, Rare equipment has a UV of 2, and Expert equipment has a UV of 3.  Unique weapons and armor count as having UV numbers of 3 as well, but have additional unique upgrades that distinguish them from all other pieces of equipment.

Mundane equipment is meant to be used by characters of levels 1-4, Rare equipment is meant to be used by characters of levels 4-6, Expert equipment is meant to be used by characters of levels 7-9, and Unique equipment is meant to be acquired by characters of levels 9-10.  The exception to this rule is accessories, which do not have UV numbers but instead each possess a single upgrade that either counts as Partial or Total.  Accessories with _<dfn id = "term-partial-upgrade">Partial</dfn>_ upgrades give bonuses to a character's Evasion or Resistance, while accessories with _<dfn id = "term-total-upgrade">Total</dfn>_ upgrades do not.

There are three kinds of equipment that characters can wear: weapons, armor, and accessories.  The Quality and number of upgrades on a piece of equipment determine the base cost to purchase them from a vendor, with the exception of Unique weapons, which are only available as rewards for adventuring.  The formulae for calculating base cost for different pieces of equipment are as follows:
*  [Weapons](Weapons): Mundane weapons cost 100 cr, Rare weapons cost 1,000 cr, and Expert weapons cost 10,000 cr.  Each UV 1 upgrade multiplies the cost of a weapon by 2, each UV 2 upgrade multiplies the cost of a weapon by 4, and each UV 3 upgrade multiplies the cost of a weapon by 8.
*  [Armor](Armor): Mundane armor costs 500 cr, Rare armor costs 2,500 cr, and Expert armor costs 12,500 cr.  Each UV 1 upgrade multiplies the cost of an armor set by 2, each UV 2 upgrade multiplies the cost of an armor set by 4, and each UV 3 upgrade multiplies the cost of an armor set by 8.
* [Accessories](Accessories): The base cost of an accessory is 750 cr.  A Partial Upgrade multiplies the base cost of an accessory by 2, while a Total Upgrade multiplies it by 4.
* [Equipment Upgrades](Equipment-Upgrades): The cost of an equipment upgrade is between 100 and 1000 cr, depending on its UV number and the cost of the equipment being upgraded.
