# Anima

In Last Odyssey, the [player characters](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player-character) are able to wield the power of magic.  Run-of-the-mill [abilities](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability) are powered by [Mana](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-mana), but the most potent form of magic is instead powered by _<dfn id = "term-anima">Anima</dfn>,_ which is a form of magic that manipulates fate which only player characters and [Antagonists](../Enemies/Antagonists/) can wield.  In order to summon their [eidolon](../Characters/Eidolons#term-eidolon) and to use certain abilities, [characters](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) must spend Anima.  Anima finds its expression through the actions of the PCs and their [eidolons](../Characters/Eidolons), and in the existence of [Villains](../Enemies/Antagonists/Villains) and [Monsters](../Enemies/Antagonists/Monsters).  Anima is not good or bad, but simply powerful.  There is no way to destroy Anima without also destroying fate itself.

## Earning Anima
Player characters are agents of change, and when they pursue change they will also accrue the power of Anima.  Earning Anima is what allows [players](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player) to advance their [tier](../Characters/Character-Creation#term-tier), overcome [skill challenges](../Free-Play/Skill-Challenges), and save themselves from [True Death](../Free-Play/True-Death).  In Last Odyssey, earning Anima isn't just something that happens.  Rather, players earn Anima in return for putting things that are important to them at risk.  There are five scenarios which a character can initiate to earn Anima:
*  When a character puts their life at risk for something important to them, they will earn 3 Anima.
*  When a character puts one of their [Relationships](../Characters/Character-Creation#term-relationship) at risk for something important to them, they will earn 1 Anima.
*  When a character puts one of their [Aspirations](../Characters/Character-Creation#term-aspiration) at risk for something important to them, they will earn 1 Anima.
*  When a character puts something important to them at risk for the sake of one of their Relationships, they will earn 1 Anima.
*  When a character puts something important to them at risk for the sake of one of their Aspirations, they will earn 1 Anima.

Players are always allowed to count Aspirations and Relationships as things that are important to their character for the sake of earning Anima.  If something is important to their character but is not a listed Aspiration or Relationship, then whether they can earn Anima by putting it at risk or by putting something at risk for the sake of it is a matter of [GM](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-gm) [fiat](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-fiat).  Here are some possibilities for what counts as important to a character:
*  Reputation with a [faction](../GM-Resources/Worldbuilding#term-faction), [settlement](../GM-Resources/Settlements/), or important person.
*  Wealth, power, prestige, or social standing, so long as it goes beyond their immediate personal possessions.
*  Important attributes that don't have to do with adventuring, such as a beautiful face or noble bearing.

## Using Anima
Each player character is empowered with magic whose root is the Anima accumulated inside of their souls.  In game terms, this means that they can earn Anima by acting out scenes and spend Anima to gain mechanical advantages.  All player characters can have a maximum of 10 Anima at a time.  Once they accumulate this much, they must spend some in order to earn any more.

Players can spend Anima in or out of [combat](../Combat-Rules/) in any of the following ways:
*  During travel, they may spend 1 Anima to automatically succeed on a [navigation roll](../Exploration-Rules/The-Travel-Round#term-navigation-roll).
*  In combat, they can spend 3 Anima to take the [Summon Eidolon](../Combat-Rules/The-Combat-Round#term-summon-eidolon) [action](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-action).
*  In combat, they must spend 1 Anima per round to keep their eidolon on the field.
*  In combat, they may spend 1 Anima to turn any die roll into either a 1 or a 10, with the exception of [calling Initiative](../Combat-Rules/Starting-Battles#term-calling-initiative).
*  In and out of combat, they can spend 3 Anima to save themselves from True Death.  If so, they will be revived at 1 [HP](../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-hp) after the danger that threatened their life has passed.  They must do this at the moment of their own death, and they cannot intervene to save any other characters but themselves.
*  Out of combat, they can spend 1 Anima to automatically succeed on a skill challenge.
*  Out of combat, they can spend 1 Anima to ask whether or not the situation they are in is dangerous.
*  Out of combat, they can spend 1 Anima to revive their eidolon to full HP.

## Scenes
In Last Odyssey, when a player would earn an Anima, they and the other people at the gaming table act out a _<dfn id = "term-scene">Scene</dfn>._  A Scene is a dramatic cutscene that somehow either directly or indirectly contextualizes their decision and its results.  During a Scene, the player earning the Anima will be the Scene's main protagonist, and the other players will serve as the main supporting cast, taking on the roles of supporting characters or parts of the Scene itself, such as the lighting, the camera, or the music.  The GM is the one to fill any extra parts if needed.  A Scene ends once sufficient justification for the central character to give up what they are sacrificing is established, at which point every player in the supporting cast will earn a single Anima, and the main character of the scene will earn 1-3 Anima depending on the depth of what they risked.

Each player may initiate a Scene once per game [session](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-session), although they can participate in as many Scenes as they like in supporting roles.  Scenes can be as abstract or concrete as player characters want, ranging from childhood flashbacks to confessions of love to arguments with God or with a pantheon of gods, but they always begin with a character choosing to risk something valuable to them, whether that be a Relationship, a beloved object, an occupation, a title, or even their sense of themselves, and end with the character choosing to put that thing at risk.  Once the scene is over, the GM rolls the [outcome die](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-outcome-die).  If the result is a 5 or below, the thing that the player risked is permanently changed, while if they roll above a 5 the thing that the player risked may remain as it was if this is what they desire.  How exactly what the player was putting at risk permanently changes depends on what was being risked in the first place.  For example, if the player character is risking their honor as a warrior, then the result of the outcome die determines whether or not their honor is tarnished.  The notable exception to this is if the player character's life was at risk, in which case they will experience True Death.  In this case, players may spend 3 Anima they had prior to the Anima they would earn from risking their life in order to save their character, but not the Anima their character would have earned from risking their life during the Scene.

## Example Scenes
*  The [party](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-party) has managed to seal the Moon Dragon with a ritual that will send it forward 10,000 years into the future.  Unfortunately, one of them needs to stay behind to ensure that the ritual is a success.  The player whose character stays behind rolls the outcome die.  If the result is a 5 or below, their character dies and the party earns 3 Anima.  If the result is above a 5, the player can choose whether or not their character dies.  If they live, their character earns 3 Anima.  
*  A character is called upon to violate one of the central tenets of their faith, and therefore risk excommunication, in order to save their younger sister.  The player in question rolls the outcome die.  If the result is equal to or below a 5, their fears are realized, and the church publicly condemns their actions.  If the result is above a 5, the player can choose the outcome of their own actions.  Either way, the player and all participating co-players earn 1 Anima.
*  A character needs to leave home in order to continue on their [adventure](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-adventure).  However, this also means leaving their overprotective mother.  When they confront their mother, they roll the outcome die to determine if they can decide their reaction or not.  One of the other players elects to play their mother during the Scene, resulting in both of their characters earning 1 point of Anima.
*  One of the characters in the party wants to become famous, and decides to take credit for slaying a monster that someone else slayed instead.  The player in question rolls the outcome die to determine if that character is angry about it.  If the roll "succeeds," they are able to choose the [NPC's](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-npc) reaction.  In either case, they earn 1 Anima.
