# Earning XP

The progress of the [player characters](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player-character) through a [campaign](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-campaign) is measured in the amount of _<dfn id = "term-xp">experience points</dfn>_ they earn.  Experience points, or XP for short, are a resource that can be spent to make characters stronger and more capable.  See the [Character Advancement](../Characters/Character-Advancement) section for more details.  In total, it takes 2,310 XP to progress a character from the beginning of [tier](../Characters/Character-Creation#term-tier) 1 to the end of tier 10.  Planning out the relative amount of XP that [players](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player) will earn from different sources is one way for the [GM](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-gm) to determine what elements of a campaign to emphasize.  There are five different ways that player characters can earn XP:
*  _<dfn id = "term-combat-xp">Combat XP</dfn>_ is earned by defeating [enemies](../Enemies#term-enemy) and [Antagonists](../Enemies/Antagonists/) in [battle](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-battle).  Defeating a [Normal](../Enemies/Enemy-Creation#term-normal-enemy) enemy in [combat](../Combat-Rules/) is worth 1 XP, defeating an [Elite](../Enemies/Enemy-Creation#term-elite-enemy) enemy is worth 5 XP, and defeating an Antagonist is worth 10 XP per [Form](../Enemies/Antagonists#term-form) defeated, adjusted for the relative tier of the players and their enemies.
*  _<dfn id = "term-discovery-xp">Discovery XP</dfn>_ is earned by discovering new and interesting places in the [overworld](../Exploration-Rules#term-overworld).  Coming across a [landmark](../GM-Resources/Settlements/Landmarks), arriving at a new, easily accessible [node](../Exploration-Rules/Nodes-and-Paths#term-node), discovering a new level of a [dungeon](../GM-Resources/Dungeons), and overcoming a [natural hazard](../Exploration-Rules/Hazards-and-Encounters#term-natural-hazard) are all worth 1 XP, while discovering a hard-to-reach node or secret area is worth 5 XP.
*  _<dfn id = "term-lore-xp">Lore XP</dfn>_ is earned by learning and recording previously unknown or actionable knowledge about the world.  Each small piece of [Lore](../Free-Play/Lore) is worth 1 XP, each secret or larger chunk of Lore is worth 5 XP, and campaign-defining revelations are worth 20 XP each.
*  _<dfn id = "term-puzzle-xp">Puzzle XP</dfn>_ is earned each time players successfully solve a stage of a [puzzle](../Free-Play/Puzzles).  Each stage of a puzzle is worth 5 additional XP.
*  _<dfn id = "term-quest-xp">Quest XP</dfn>_ is earned when player characters advance the plot of a campaign.  Each [stage](../Free-Play/Quests#term-quest-stage) of a [quest](../Free-Play/Quests#term-quest) the players complete is worth 5 XP, while completing a whole quest that is more than two stages long is worth an additional 10 XP.
