#  Items

Items that do not count as equipment but that still have weight are carred in a [character's](/srd/key-terms#term-character) _<dfn id = "term-inventory">inventory</dfn>,_ which represents the items in their backpacks, pockets, satchel, etc.  In addition to its effects and base cost, each item in an inventory has an _<dfn id = "term-item-rating">item rating</dfn>_ that is a number between 1 to 10 that is a measure of how much space it takes up in the party's pockets, backpacks, on their backs, etc.  The _<dfn id = "term-carrying-capacity">Carrying Capacity</dfn>_ of each  is the maximum sum total rating of the items that any given character can carry in their inventory at once.  Each character's carrying capacity is equal to 5 times their [Body](/srd/heroes/abilities-and-statistics#term-body) attribute plus 10.  All items carried in an inventory that have significant utility in [combat](/srd/combat) or [exploration](/srd/exploration) have an item rating of at least 1.  Travel items can have ratings of anywhere from 1-10, weapons have a rating of 5, armor has a rating of 10, and each accessory has a rating of 2.  A character's currently equipped weapon, [armor](/srd/economy/equipment/armor), and accessories do not take up any space in their inventory.

During [battle](/srd/key-terms#term-battle), all of the items that each [player](/srd/key-terms#term-player) has are shared between party members.  However, [weapons](/srd/economy/equipment/weapons) and [accessories](/srd/economy/equipment/accessories) are not.  This means that any party member can use any item in any other party member's inventory, but cannot equip another character's weapons or accessories during battle.  Once an item is used once, it is automatically expended and disappears from the party inventory.  Only special items called battle items can be used during battle, but all items including battle items can be used outside of battle.  Unless otherwise specified, it takes a negligible amount of time for a character to use a battle item outside of combat, around a couple of seconds of in-narrative time.  When you use a battle item, you can use it on any character on the battlefield including yourself regardless of where that character is currently located.

By default, a [Follower's](/srd/economy/followers) inventory is not shared with the rest of the party.  However, certain friendly followers, such as long term companions or characters with a Relationship to one of the Heroes, may share their inventories during battle if appropriate.

There are two different types of items that have fixed rules governing them in Last Odyssey: battle items and travel items.  Other objects can take up Carrying Capacity, but this is left up to [GM](/srd/key-terms#term-gm) [fiat](/srd/key-terms#term-gm).
* [Battle Items](/srd/economy/items/battle): Items whose primary usage is during combat.
* [Travel Items](/srd/economy/items/travel): Items whose primary usage is during exploration.
