# Archetypes

Every [player character](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-player-character) has a single _<dfn id = "term-archetype">archetype</dfn>_ that represents the qualities that make them heroic, with each one being most associated with a single heroic virtue.  At [character creation](/srd/characters/creation), a character's archetype determines their [armor](/srd/economy/equipment/armor) and [weapon](/srd/economy/equipment/weapons) [proficiencies](/srd/characters/creation#term-weapon-proficiency).  It also determines the [statistic](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-statistic) that their [buff](/srd/combat/buffs-and-debuffs#term-buff) [abilities](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-ability) in the [Support](/srd/characters/jobs/support) [job](/srd/characters/jobs) increase, as well as the [statistic](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-statistic) that their [debuff](/srd/combat/buffs-and-debuffs#term-debuff) abilities in the [Saboteur](/srd/characters/jobs/saboteur) job decrease, and gives a bonus to a character's [Health](/srd/characters/attributes-and-statistics#term-health), [Mana](/srd/characters/attributes-and-statistics#term-mana), and [Initiative](/srd/characters/attributes-and-statistics#term-initiative).  As you increase your character's [tier](/srd/characters/creation#term-tier), their archetype will also provide abilities that can be used regardless of what job you currently occupy in [combat](/srd/combat).  During the later tiers, their archetype will also provide talents to choose from, which modify their existing abilities while they occupy the associated job.  At tier 10, instead of unlocking a normal combat ability, you unlock a capstone ability that your [eidolon](/srd/characters/eidolons#term-eidolon) can use when summoned.

In Last Odyssey, there are nine archetypes to choose from:
*  [The Ranger](/srd/characters/archetypes/ranger): An archetype with extra mobility and physical precision.
*  [The Thief](/srd/characters/archetypes/thief): An archetype with the ability to steal and hide in order to control the flow of [battle](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-battle).
*  [The Artificer](/srd/characters/archetypes/artificer): An archetype that can make special use of [battle items](/srd/economy/items/battle) and learn information about their enemies.
*  [The Sage](/srd/characters/archetypes/sage): An archetype that specializes in defending against and dealing magical damage.
*  [The Dancer](/srd/characters/archetypes/dancer): An archetype that can mimic enemies and change their [elemental type](/srd/combat/elemental-types#term-elemental-type) at will.
*  [The Priest](/srd/characters/archetypes/priest): An archetype with the power to heal [MP](/srd/characters/attributes-and-statistics#term-mp) and help their allies.
*  [The Knight](/srd/characters/archetypes/knight): An archetype that focuses on dealing and taking physical damage.
*  [The Commander](/srd/characters/archetypes/commander): An archetype that can help augment their teammates' capabilities.
*  [The Harlequin](/srd/characters/archetypes/harlequin): An archetype that uses random abilities to throw their enemies off balance.
