---
title: Lore

permalink: /srd/discovery/lore

abstract: >-
    A guide to creating Lore.
---

While traveling, [players](/srd/glossary#term-player) will learn new facts about the world, such as secrets or forms of specialized knowledge.  This can include facts about [Antagonists](/srd/anima/antagonists), facts about the world's history, facts about its culture and people, specialized academic or scientific knowledge, and so on.  In Last Odyssey, information of this type that would not be common knowledge for the player characters is referred to as _<dfn id = "term-lore">Lore</dfn>._  When players learn Lore, they will be granted 1 <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr> for each single piece of information they learn about a topic for the first time, with the total amount of Lore available on a certain topic depending on how important it is to the [campaign](/srd/glossary#term-campaign).  Generally speaking, Lore about an [adventure](/srd/glossary#term-adventure)-level topic will grant up to 5 [<abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr>](/srd/discovery/earning-xp#term-xp), and a campaign-defining topic may grant a total 10 <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr> or more.  Players are also able to learn more than one Lore statement at a time, but each individual piece is worth 1 <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr>.  By the end of a Lore-heavy campaign, the players will have an extensive Lore bible that they can refer back to when needed.  [Heroes](/srd/glossary#term-hero) cannot earn <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr> for learning the same piece of Lore more than once.

## Making Use of Lore

Players can use relevant Lore that they have learned to solve [puzzles](/srd/discovery/puzzles), bypass [skill challenges](/srd/discovery/skill-challenges), or conduct successful [investigations](/srd/discovery/investigation#term-investigation).  This does not require the expenditure of [<abbr title = "anima">🜉</abbr>](/srd/anima), the use of <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr>, or the casting of any dice.  If the players and the <abbr title="game master">[GM](/srd/glossary#term-gm)</abbr> agree that an item of Lore will help them succeed on a task, it simply does.  This aspect of Lore makes it useful for simulating certain forms of Hero knowledge that are otherwise outside of the mechanical scope of Last Odyssey.  Here are some examples:
*  Language.  <abbr title="game master">GM</abbr>s that want to make language a centerpiece of their campaign can represent it as Lore.  The more adept the Heroes become at a language, the more <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr> they earn, and the more they can say, write, and understand.  This applies equally to living languages and dead ones.
*  Technology.  In some settings, remnants of past technology are scattered around the environment.  Learning to use and operate this technology is a matter of Lore.  The more technological Lore the players gather, the more they can use the technology of the ancients, allowing them to solve puzzles, gain [equipment](/srd/economy/equipment), and sometimes even gain advantages in [combat](/srd/combat).
*  Ritual Magic.  While Heroes may innately use the power of [Mana](/srd/heroes/numbers#term-mana), there are certain uses of it that require more involved study and practice.  In settings with high magic, or with occult or spiritual elements, certain powers can be invoked by elaborate series of steps that the players can perform.  The players must know all of the steps of a ritual to use it, and learning each step will net them 1 additional <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr>.
*  Etiquette.  High-risk social situations such as courtship or diplomacy will have strict rules around how to behave.  If players are not already well-versed in matters of etiquette, its rules will count as Lore.  Players' relative skill at a given type of etiquette would correspond to the amount of Lore <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr> they have earned during the learning process.
*  Exploration.  Learning the locations of lost trade routes, ruins, or hidden temples also counts as Lore.  In this case, the players earn 1 <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr> per clue as to where the thing they are seeking is located, and also earn additional [Exploration <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr>](/srd/discovery/earning-xp#term-exploration-xp) when they arrive.
