---
title: Quests

permalink: /srd/discovery/quests

abstract: >-
    The rules for and rewards of quests.
---

Whenever the [party](/srd/glossary#term-party) sets a significant goal for themselves or are assigned one by a third party, they will receive a _<dfn id = "term-quest">quest</dfn>._  Quests serve two purposes in [campaigns](/srd/glossary#term-campaign).  The first is to ensure that [players](/srd/glossary#term-player) always have a thread they can follow in order to advance the plot.  The second is to create story milestones they can cross that will grant them <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr> regardless of what else they accomplished along the way.  Every quest the <abbr title="game master">[GM](/srd/glossary#term-gm)</abbr> assigns to the players will have a definite series of _<dfn id = "term-quest-stage">stages</dfn>,_ which are subtasks that, when completed, will net them 5 [<abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr>](/srd/discovery/earning-xp#term-xp).  The completion of a quest that has more than two stages will net players an additional 10 <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr>.

At minimum, every quest has three components: a starting condition, a task or set of tasks, and an <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr> reward.  <abbr title="game master">GM</abbr>s should encourage players to decide on their own quests over the course of the campaign.  Perhaps they learn [Lore](/srd/discovery/lore) about a [Monster](/srd/anima/antagonists/monsters) and want to track it down, or perhaps they decide to take down the corrupt mayor of a small [town](/srd/exploration/settlements/towns).  Every new quest the players take on will have a clear set of conditions under which the quest is resolved, as well as a set of conditions under which it can no longer be completed.  Due to the natural unpredictability of tabletop roleplaying, <abbr title="game master">GM</abbr>s should keep the tasks assigned to players both simple and specific.

If players are able to resolve a quest without completing all of the planned tasks, they will still receive all of the additional <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr> they would have received if they had completed it the intended way.  However, if players fail a quest, they do not receive any additional <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr>.  That being said, it's bad <abbr title="game master">GM</abbr>ing to simply lock the players out of continuing the story if they fail a quest.  Instead, failure should make the narrative more interesting by creating new quests for the players to complete and having tangible consequences that are reflected in the game world.

## Quest Rewards

Whether a quest is given to the players by a third party or they decide on one themselves, they will also come with rewards besides <abbr title = "experience">🜹</abbr> (and the satisfaction of a good tabletop [session](/srd/glossary#term-session), of course).  Unique [equipment](/srd/economy/equipment), [items](/srd/economy/items), and heaps of [<abbr title = "currency">¤</abbr>](/srd/economy/currency#term-cr) are all additional incentives that [characters](/srd/glossary#term-character) who hire the players will offer them as a reward for completing tasks.  <abbr title="game master">GM</abbr>s should be aware when doling out these rewards that higher [tier](/srd/heroes/creation#term-tier) [warriors](/srd/warriors) are balanced around the assumption that characters will be facing them with equipment of at least the corresponding [Grade](/srd/economy/equipment#term-equipment-grade).

While balancing rewards in a tabletop context is not an exact science, a good rule of thumb is that the amount of <abbr title = "currency">¤</abbr> and/or equivalent <abbr title = "currency">¤</abbr> value of the reward for a quest per quest stage should be approximately one to six multiplied by 100 multiplied by the characters' current tier.  The way that players acquire these rewards ought to vary wildly so as to avoid the feeling of artificiality that tends to result from round numbers.  For example, [Heroes](/srd/glossary#term-hero) may come across an old weapon on the corpse of a dead adventurer in a [dungeon](/srd/exploration/dungeons), while in the woods they may be granted an item or set of items as a boon from a forest spirit.
