# Climate Modifiers

Some climates are more hostile than others.  If [GMs](/srd/key-terms#term-gm) want to provide more variation and challenge to their [players](/srd/key-terms#term-player) while they travel along a [path](/srd/exploration/nodes-and-paths#term-path), or if the region is in the grip of a [Monster](/srd/anima/antagonists/monsters), they can add one or more of the following modifiers to a given climate:
*  <dfn id = "term-mild">Mild</dfn>: the climate here is less volatile than usual.  Unless otherwise specified, instead of casting the [outcome die](/srd/key-terms#term-outcome-die) to determine the weather during the [Navigation Phase](/srd/exploration/travel/round#term-pathfinding), the GM casts 1d6 and then consults the [weather table](/srd/exploration/weather-and-climate#term-weather-table).
*  <dfn id = "term-dangerous">Dangerous</dfn>: the climate here is more volatile than usual.  Unless otherwise specified, instead of casting the outcome die to determine the weather during the Navigation Phase, the GM casts 1d6, adds 4 to the result, and then consults the weather table.
*  <dfn id = "term-subterranean">Subterranean</dfn>: this region or path is deep underground.  All effects due to glare or brightness are negated, but the [navigation difficulty](/srd/exploration/nodes-and-paths#term-navigation-difficulty) is increased by 2 unless the players are able to maintain a light source.
*  <dfn id = "term-volcanic">Volcanic</dfn>: this area is home to high volcanic activity.  Every day, the GM casts an additional outcome die when they consult the weather table.  If the result is a 10 on this die, volcanic activity will be visible in the sky, obscuring the sun and negating any effects from brightness.  However, they will also have to resist a [status-inflicting](/srd/combat/attacking-and-defending#term-status-inflicting-ability) [ability](/srd/key-terms#term-ability) during the Navigation Phase with a [Status Accuracy](/srd/heroes/attributes-and-statistics#term-status-accuracy) equal to the navigation difficulty of the path that inflicts [Poisoned](/srd/combat/statuses#term-poisoned) on a hit unless they have proper protection.
*  <dfn id = "term-overgrown">Overgrown</dfn>: the path is choked with flora, making it difficult to advance forward.  The navigation difficulty is increased by 2.
*  <dfn id = "term-barren">Barren</dfn>: there is very little life here, or at least very little life that is well-suited to harboring humans.  The [Hunt](/srd/exploration/travel/round#term-hunt-action) and [Gather](/srd/exploration/travel/round#term-gather-action) [actions](/srd/key-terms#term-action) are impossible during the [Camping Phase](/srd/exploration/travel/round#term-camping-phase).
*  <dfn id = "term-artificial">Artificial</dfn>: the weather patterns here are determined by something more purposeful than the laws of physics.  The [Divine](/srd/exploration/travel/round#term-divine-action) action is impossible during the Camping Phase, but the weather is deterministic rather than random, and players will be able to discover the pattern either through deduction or through gathering [Lore](/srd/discovery/lore).
*  <dfn id = "term-burning">Burning</dfn>: this region is currently suffering from ongoing wildfires.  Every day, the GM casts an additional outcome die when they consult the weather table.  If the result is a 10 on this die, the [Heroes](/srd/key-terms#term-hero) will have to avoid a nearby fire, which takes the form of a status-inflicting ability during the Navigation Phase with a Status Accuracy equal to the navigation difficulty of the path that inflicts [Burned](/srd/combat/statuses#term-burned) on a hit against them.
*  <dfn id = "term-windy">Windy</dfn>: high winds scour this area, and make it more difficult to travel.  Players must wear a [Cloak](/srd/economy/items/travel#term-cloak) of some variety every day or else take an amount of damage equal to the navigation difficulty of the path during the Navigation Phase.
*  <dfn id = "term-infested">Infested</dfn>: this area is crawling with enemies.  If the Heroes do not encounter a natural hazard during the Encounter Phase, they will automatically run into an enemy encounter.
