# Combat

In Last Odyssey, when [player characters](/srd/key-terms#term-player-character) engage in violence against one or more [NPCs](/srd/key-terms#term-npc), this is referred to as _<dfn id = "term-combat">combat</dfn>._  When combat begins, the theater of the mind is supplanted by a more restrictive theater of [battle](/srd/key-terms#term-battle) that the characters cannot exit until they either [flee](/srd/combat/round#term-flee) the fight, defeat their opponents, or are defeated by their opponents.  In Last Odyssey, combat is tactical, and the flow of time is divided into discrete, repeatable sections called [rounds](/srd/combat/round#term-round).  Each round allows each character to act at least once, although certain [abilities](/srd/key-terms#term-ability), such as the [Saboteur's](/srd/characters/jobs/saboteur) Slow or the [Commander's](/srd/characters/archetypes/commander) Orders, can create exceptions to this rule.

Combat is over when all characters on either side are [downed](/srd/characters/attributes-and-statistics#term-downed), have surrendered, or have fled.  In Last Odyssey, combat begins at the moment in the story when violence breaks out, and when the violence in question is a struggle between two opposing sides.  A lot of this depends on [player](/srd/key-terms#term-player) intent.  An attack by bandits or an attempt by players to slay a dragon are perfect examples of when battle is appropriate, whereas a bar fight might be better handled by a skill challenge or simply by the narrative.  A masterful [GM](/srd/key-terms#term-gm) will know when to surprise players, when to give them an out, and when and how to foreshadow when combat might be approaching so that players are adequately prepared and when it's better to catch them by surprise.  Combat is when player characters most strongly express themselves but is also, perhaps not coincidentally, a fatiguing exercise, particularly for players who have to keep track of many shifting variables while also being stressed about the potential negative consequences of failure.  One or two combat [encounters](/srd/enemies/encounters#term-encounter) per game [session](/srd/key-terms#term-session) is a good limit to impose if you're GMing for a group of beginners, and many sessions you play will feature none at all.

All singular instances of combat involving the player characters in Last Odyssey are referred to as battles.  Each battle takes place between two opposing sides, with the player characters and their allies on one side and their enemies on the other.  Any elements of the battlefield that cannot act by themselves can still be interacted with by characters that use the [Interact](/srd/combat/round#term-interact) [action](/srd/key-terms#term-action).  The effects of the Interact action always trigger during the [Effect Phase](/srd/combat/round#term-effect-phase) of the battle.

* [Starting Battles](/srd/combat/starting): A guide to the process of starting a battle.
* [The Combat Round](/srd/combat/round): How in-game time flows during combat.
* [Attacking and Defending](/srd/combat/attacking-and-defending): The rules for dealing with [magical attacks](/srd/combat/attacking-and-defending#term-magical-attack), [physical attacks](/srd/combat/attacking-and-defending#term-physical-attack), and [status-inflicting abilities](/srd/combat/attacking-and-defending#term-status-inflicting-ability).
* [Elemental Types](/srd/combat/elemental-types): Abilities that do damage do more or less damage depending on their elemental type.
* [Shells](/srd/combat/shells): A special type of HP that gives protection from physical attacks, and vulnerability to magical attacks.
* [Buffs and Debuffs](/srd/combat/buffs-and-debuffs): Increasing and decreasing character [statistics](/srd/key-terms#term-statistic) during battle.
* [Statuses](/srd/combat/statuses): How to handle negative and positive effects within Last Odyssey's combat system.
* [Ending Combat](/srd/combat/ending): The aftermath of a resolved fight.
* [Death and Injury](/srd/combat/death-and-injury): The consequences of losing.
