# Antagonists

Some of the enemies that the [players](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player) face are more powerful than ordinary opponents, and can use Anima to break the normal rules of gameplay.  In Last Odyssey, these enemies are referred to as _<dfn id = "term-antagonist">Antagonists</dfn>._  There are two major types of Antagonists:
*  _<dfn id = "term-villain">Villains</dfn>_ are driven by their ego to accrue political and social power.  A Villain's defining feature is their _Ambition,_ which is a single goal that motivates everything that they do.
*  _<dfn id = "term-monster">Monsters</dfn>_ are driven by their instincts to accumulate more territory and raw strength.  The defining feature of a capital-M Monster is their _Domain,_ which is a territory in the overworld where they are able to act outside of normal constraints.

The power of Antagonists is reflected by their ability to accumulate and use Anima.  Like [player characters](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player-character), an Antagonist can have a maximum of 10 Anima at a time.  During [battle](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-battle), Antagonists are not defeated when they are [downed](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-downed).  Instead, each time they are downed, they will change into their next Form during the Paradigm Phase until they have run out.  Each _<dfn id = "term-form">Form</dfn>_ of an Antagonist corresponds to each subsequent set of [statistics and abilities](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics) they are able to employ during battle.  Once an Antagonist has run out of Forms and cannot use the Revive [action](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-action), they will undergo True Death.  After an Antagonist is defeated, players will earn 100 cr multiplied by a Phase's tier per defeated Phase as well as 1-4 pieces of equipment.  Antagonists can have as many Phases as the [GM](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-gm) wants, but players will struggle to defeat more than two in a row in a single battle.  Defeating an Antagonist in combat is also worth 10 [XP](../../Characters/Character-Advancement#term-experience-points) per Phase defeated multiplied the tier of the Phase.  So, defeating an Antagonist that has one Phase at tier 2 and another at tier 4 would be worth 20 XP plus 40 XP for a total of 60 XP.

During combat, Antagonists are capable of taking extra actions at the beginning of the paradigm phase called _<dfn id = "term-paradigm-action">paradigm actions</dfn>._  If an Antagonist takes a paradigm action, its effects will trigger before players have the chance to switch Jobs.  Antagonists can only use one paradigm action per round.  There are three kinds of paradigm actions that all Antagonists can take:
*  <dfn id = "paradigm-retreat">Retreat</dfn>.  If an Antagonist reaches the end of a combat round having been downed but with Forms still remaining, the GM may choose to end the battle and have the Antagonist escape the players' grasp.  At the conclusion of the battle, the players will earn XP for each Form that they managed to down in addition to XP from any other enemies besides the Antagonist they downed during the battle.
*  <dfn id = "paradigm-advance-form">Advance Form</dfn>.  If an Antagonist has been downed, they may continue the fight by moving to their next Form if they still have any remaining.  When this happens, the Antagonist will take its place in the initiative order according to its new [Initiative](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-initiative) score without the players having to call Initiative again.
*  <dfn id = "paradigm-cause-death">Cause Death</dfn>.  Monsters and Villains have unique abilities that can cause a player [character](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) to undergo True Death while in combat.  Monsters have the Devour paradigm action, which lets them drain Anima from downed characters before attempting to kill them, while Villains have the Coup de Grace paradigm action, which lets them spend 3 Anima to kill off a downed player character.
*  <dfn id = "paradigm-dismiss-eidolon">Dismiss Eidolon</dfn>.  If a player character's Eidolon is on the battlefield, the Antagonist may spend 1 Anima to immediately cause the Eidolon to disappear.  If a player character's Eidolon is dismissed in this manner, they cannot summon it again until the end of the next paradigm phase.

In addition to the paradigm actions listed above, each Form of an Antagonist is capable of using a number of Job- or Class-specific Eidolon capstone abilities as paradigm actions equal to their tier divided by 3 rounded down.  Using one of these abilities costs 1 Anima, but does not cost any action points.  The abilities that count as valid paradigm actions are Dragonslayer, Apocalypse, Second Chance, Mirror Shield, Comeback, Vortex, Wild Hunt, Assassinate, Target Acquired, Ascension, Tango, Divine Intervention, Rout, Charge!, and Spin the Revolver.  The GM can also invent their own if they wish, or use any of the unique paradigm actions from the Example Antagonists section.

* [Monsters:](Monsters) Antagonists that occupy a space in the overworld called their Domain and seek to gather Anima in order to expand it.
* [Villains:](Villains) Antagonists that accumulate Anima for the purpose of doggedly pursuing a single Ambition.
* [Example Antagonists:](Example-Antagonists) Ready-made combat and story information for Antagonists to include in your [campaign](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-campaign).
