# Attributes and Statistics

The capabilities of a [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) during battle are represented by their [attributes](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-attribute), their [statistics](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-statistic), and their [abilities](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability).  Likewise, the [abilities](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability) a [player character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player-character) can use are determined by the job they occupy and its current rank, their class, their items, their equipment, and whatever flex powers they have taken during [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) advancement.

A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-stamina">stamina</dfn>_ in battle is represented by two scores, their _<dfn id="term-hp">Hit Points</dfn>_ and their _<dfn id="term-mp">Mana Points</dfn>._  Throughout these rules, these will be shortened to <abbr title="hit points">HP</abbr> and <abbr title="mana points">MP</abbr>, respectively.  When a [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) is hit with an [ability](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability) that counts as a physical attack or magical attack, their [HP](#term-hp) is reduced by the calculated damage number.  When a [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) uses an [ability](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) that has an [MP](#term-mp) cost, their [MP](#term-mp) is reduced by that amount.  [Characters](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) may never use an [ability](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability) that costs more than their current [MP](#term-mp), and a [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) [MP](#term-mp) and [HP](#term-hp) can never go below zero.  If a [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) [HP](#term-hp) is reduced to zero, they’re said to have been _<dfn id="term-downed">downed</dfn>._  A [downed](#term-downed) [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) cannot [act](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-action) and cannot be the target of more effects.  See [Death and Injury](../Combat-Rules/Death-and-Injury.md) for more details.

The core of a [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) capabilities are made up of their [attributes](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-attribute), three numbers from 1 to 10 that measure their relative aptitude in a particular domain of action.
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-body">Body</dfn>_ is a measure of how adept they are at pushing their athletic abilities to the limit, from hand-eye coordination to endurance running.
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-mind">Mind</dfn>_ is a measure of how quick and able they are at intellectually challenging tasks, from logical debate to solving mathematical puzzles.
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-spirit">Spirit</dfn>_ is a representation of their strength of personality.  This governs their aptitude for social interactions, as well as their ability to empathize with others.

In combat, a [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) strengths and weaknesses are represented by 12 numbers known as their [statistics](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-statistic).  Each [statistic](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-statistic) is either tied to a pool that they lose or gain depending on the situation, or a number that determines the probability that different outcomes will occur when they use their [abilities](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability) in conjunction with the [statistics](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-statistic) of other [characters](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character).
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-initiative">Initiative</dfn>_ determines when they act in combat.  The higher their [Initiative](#term-initiative) is, the sooner they act.  Their [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) [Initiative](#term-initiative) is equal to their [Mind](#term-mind) times 2 plus the bonus they receive from their class at Tier 1.
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-health">Health</dfn>_ is their [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) maximum [HP](#term-hp) during combat.  It is equal to their [Body](#term-body) times 5 plus the bonus they receive from their class at Tier 1.
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-mana">Mana</dfn>_ is their [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) maximum [MP](#term-mp) during combat.  It is equal to their [Spirit](#term-spirit) times 5 plus the bonus they receive from their class at Tier 1.
*  Any physical attacks a [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) makes deal a base <!-- NB: unlinked as it appears likely to be an informal use of “base”? --> amount of damage that is increased by their _<dfn id="term-physical-attack">Physical Attack</dfn>_ unless otherwise specified.  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) [Physical Attack](#term-physical-attack) is equal to the bonus given by their equipped weapon plus the bonus applied by their current job if there is one.
*  Any magical attacks a [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) makes deal a base  <!-- NB: unlinked as it appears likely to be an informal use of “base”? --> amount of damage that is increased by their _<dfn id="term-magical-attack">Magical Attack</dfn>_ unless otherwise specified.  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) [Magical Attack](#term-magical-attack) is equal to the bonus given by their equipped weapon plus the bonus applied by their current job if there is one.
*  Any physical damage a [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) receives is reduced by their _<dfn id="term-physical-defense">Physical Defense</dfn>._  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) [Physical Defense](#term-physical-defense) is equal to the bonus from their equipped armor plus the bonus from their current job if there is one.
*  Any magical damage a [character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) receives is reduced by their _<dfn id="term-magical-defense">Magical Defense</dfn>._  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) [Magical Defense](#term-magical-defense) is equal to the bonus from their equipped armor plus the bonus from their current job if there is one.
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-evasion">Evasion</dfn>_ reduces the likelihood that they will be hit by either a physical or magical attack.  A character's [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) Evasion is equal to the bonus from their equipped accessories plus the bonus from their current job if there is one.
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _Resistance_ increases the likelihood that they will resist status-inflicting abilties.  A character's [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) Resistance is equal to the bonus from their equipped accessories plus the bonus from their current job if there is one.
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-physical-accuracy">Physical Accuracy</dfn>_ increases their likelihood to hit an enemy with a physical attack.  Their [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) [Physical Accuracy](#term-physical-accuracy) is equal to their [Mind](#term-mind) plus their [Body](#term-body).
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-magical-accuracy">Magical Accuracy</dfn>_ increases their likelihood to hit an enemy with a magical attack.  Their [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) [Magical Accuracy](#term-magical-accuracy) is equal to their [Spirit](#term-spirit) plus their [Mind](#term-mind).
*  A [character’s](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) _<dfn id="term-status-accuracy">Status Accuracy</dfn>_ increases their likelihood to inflict negative statuses on their targets.  Their [base](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-base) [Status Accuracy](#term-status-accuracy) is equal to their [Body](#term-body) plus their [Spirit](#term-spirit).
