# Ending Combat

A [battle](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-battle) is over when one of the two opposing sides has no active [characters](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-character) remaining on the field, or when one of the sides has successfully fled.  If the [players](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-player) have all been [downed](/srd/characters/attributes-and-statistics#term-downed) or killed, the [party](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-party) will lose something important before they come to.  For example, a group of robbers might steal all of their [cr](/srd/economy#term-cr), a group of wolves might eat all of their [Supplies](/srd/economy/items/travel), and a [Monster](/srd/enemies/antagonists/monsters) might kidnap them and drag them into their lair.

## Battle XP

At the end of a battle, every downed [enemy](/srd/enemies) will grant each [player character](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-player-character) [XP](/srd/free-play/earning-xp#term-xp) and also award [items](/srd/economy/items/battle) to the entire party.  Each downed [Normal](/srd/enemies/creation#term-tier-multiplier) enemy in [combat](/srd/combat) awards 1 XP to each member of the [party](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-party), while Elite enemies are worth 5 XP, and [Antagonists](/srd/enemies/antagonists) are worth 10 XP per phase.  If the players successfully [flee](/srd/combat/round#term-flee) a battle, they do not receive any rewards.  However, if their enemies successfully flee or if the entire party is downed, the players still receive the rewards for any enemies they downed before the battle ended.

Sometimes, players will encounter enemies that are of a higher or lower [tier](/srd/characters/creation#term-tier) than they are.  If this is the case, the XP they earn from each enemy is modified by the difference between the PCs' tier and their enemies' tier.  If the PCs are of a higher tier than their enemies, the difference is subtracted, while if the PCs are of a lower tier the difference is added to the XP they earn for a given enemy.  The minimum amount of XP that players can earn from a given enemy is 1, and the maximum is 10.  For example, if a group of player characters of tier 3 defeats 5 Elite enemies of tier 1, then the total amount of XP each player earns will be 15.

## Item Tables

In addition to earned XP, each defeated enemy drops an item from its item table, while Elite enemies will drop two items from their Item Table.  The _<dfn id = "term-item-table">item table</dfn>_ is a list of three possible items that an enemy can drop, each of which is assigned a number from 1 to 3.  To determine which item an enemy drops, the GM rolls a d4.  The value they roll corresponds to the item the enemy drops.  If the GM rolls a 4, the enemy does not drop an item.  The [Thief's](/srd/characters/archetypes/thief) Steal [ability](/srd/extras/key-terms#term-ability) also allows allies to gain 1 more item per enemy from their Item Table.
