# Hazards and Encounters

There are two types of dangers that [players](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player) will encounter on the road: _<dfn id = "term-natural-hazard">natural hazards</dfn>_ and [enemy](../Enemies#term-enemy) [encounters](../Enemies/Encounter-Creation#term-encounter).  A natural hazard is an obstacle caused by the natural features of the environment, such as a tangle of brambles, a field of poppies that put [characters](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) to sleep, a swamp filled with leeches, or something similar.  To overcome a natural hazard, players must approach it like a [puzzle](../Free-Play/Puzzles), using [Supplies](../The-Economy/The-Party-Inventory/Travel-Items#term-supplies), lateral thinking, [skill challenges](../Free-Play/Skill-Challenges), and/or [Anima](../Free-Play/Anima) to overcome it.  To overcome an enemy encounter, players will have to win in [combat](../Combat-Rules/).

When the result of the encounter roll is that the players will come across a natural hazard, the GM should present them with a challenging obstacle appropriate to the climate of the path they are crossing.  The [Weather and Climate](../Exploration-Rules/Weather-and-Climate/) section contains examples of natural hazards that are appropriate for different climactic conditions.  The players may tackle this problem any way they want to, and they may come up with a solution that does not require the expenditure of any items or Anima.  If so, allow them to pass over the hazard as normal.  However, the standard solution to a natural hazard consists of spending Supplies and/or explaining what equipment from the players' pack they are using to overcome the challenge, and then succeeding in a relevant skill challenge.  Less dangerous natural hazards might only require the expenditure of Supplies, while more dangerous ones might count as puzzles with multiple stages.  If the players cannot come up with a solution to the problem at hand, they may also backtrack and attempt to circle around the hazard.  If they do so, they must spend an extra travel round navigating their way through an alternative route.  If the players are able to pass the natural hazard without needing to backtrack, they also all earn 1 [XP](../Free-Play/Earning-XP#term-xp).  Certain kinds of natural hazards can also be passed by the use of Lore.

The consequences of failing to deal with a natural hazard depend on the hazard.  Here are some possible outcomes:
*  The players all receive a [status](../Combat-Rules/Statuses), such as [Poisoned](../Combat-Rules/Statuses#term-poisoned), [Burned](../Combat-Rules/Statuses#term-burned), or [Frostbitten](../Combat-Rules/Statuses#term-frostbitten).
*  The players, or any [player character](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player-character) who fails the appropriate skill challenge, receive an [injury](../Combat-Rules/Death-and-Injury#term-injury).
*  The players are forced to backtrack and waste a day of travel.
*  One or more of the above.

The other possible type of hostile encounter the [party](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-party) could come across is an enemy encounter.  This is a group of 3-5 enemies, ideally the same [tier](../Characters/Character-Creation#term-tier) as the players, that the players have to defeat in combat in order to continue on.  When creating the overworld, the [GM](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-gm) should decide which enemies are present along each path.  This will give the players a chance to learn about their enemies' [abilities](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability) and their various creature and [elemental types](../Combat-Rules/Elemental-Types#term-elemental-types) in order to be better prepared.  If the players defeat this group of enemies, they continue on to the Camping Phase of the travel round as normal.  If the players flee the encounter, they must spend an extra travel round along their journey in order to regroup and roll on the encounter table again the following day.  Finally, if at least one of the players performed a successful Scout [action](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-action) during the prior travel round and decided to go ahead with having an enemy encounter, they will gain [First Strike](../Combat-Rules/Starting-Battles#term-first-strike) during combat.  Once the [battle](../Extras/Key-Terms#term-battle) is over, distribute items and XP as normal.  If the players are all [downed](../Combat-Rules/Death-and-Injury#term-downed) during an enemy encounter, what happens next depends on the motivations of the enemies.  See the Enemies section for more details.

It is mechanically possible to roll both a natural hazard and an enemy encounter on the encounter table.  When this happens, the GM should decide which one the players encounter, but they shouldn't encounter both in a single travel round.
