# Archetypes

Every [player character](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-player-character) has a single _<dfn id = "term-archetype">archetype</dfn>_ that represents the essence of their heroism.  Each archetype is associated with a heroic virtue that has no mechanical effects but guides how a [character](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-character) behaves during the narrative.  At [character creation](../../Characters/Character-Creation), a character's archetype determines their [armor](../../The-Economy/Equipment/Armor) and [weapon](../../The-Economy/Equipment/Weapons) [proficiencies](../../Characters/Character-Creation#term-weapon-proficiency).  It also determines the [statistic](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-statistic) that their [buff](../../Combat-Rules/Buffs-and-Debuffs#term-buff) [abilities](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-ability) in the [Support](../../Characters/Jobs/Support) [job](../../Characters/Jobs/) increase, as well as the [statistic](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-statistic) that their [debuff](../../Combat-Rules/Buffs-and-Debuffs#term-debuff) abilities in the [Saboteur](../../Characters/Jobs/Saboteur) job decrease, and gives a bonus to a character's [Health](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-health), [Mana](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-mana), and [Initiative](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-initiative).  As you increase your character's [tier](../../Characters/Character-Creation#term-tier), their archetype will also provide abilities that can be used regardless of what job you currently occupy in [combat](../../Combat-Rules/).  During the later tiers, their archetype will also provide talents to choose from, which modify their existing abilities while they occupy the associated job.  At tier 10, instead of unlocking a normal combat ability, you unlock a capstone ability that your [eidolon](../../Characters/Eidolons#term-eidolon) can use when summoned.

In Last Odyssey, there are nine archetypes to choose from:
*  [The Ranger](Ranger): An archetype with extra mobility and physical precision.
*  [The Thief](Thief): An archetype with the ability to steal and hide in order to control the flow of [battle](../../Extras/Key-Terms#term-battle).
*  [The Artificer](Artificer): An archetype that can make special use of [battle items](../../The-Economy/The-Party-Inventory/Battle-Items) and learn information on their enemies.
*  [The Sage](Sage): An archetype that specializes in defending against and dealing magical damage.
*  [The Dancer](Dancer): An archetype that can mimic enemies and change their [elemental type](../../Combat-Rules/Elemental-Types#term-elemental-type) at will.
*  [The Priest](Priest): An archetype with the power to heal [MP](../../Characters/Attributes-and-Statistics#term-mp) and help their allies.
*  [The Knight](Knight): An archetype that focuses on dealing and taking physical damage.
*  [The Commander](Commander): An archetype that can help augment their teammates' capabilities.
*  [The Harlequin](Harlequin): An archetype that uses random abilities to throw their enemies off balance.
