# Scenes

Heroes are agents of change, and when they pursue change they will also accrue the power of [Anima](/srd/anima).  Earning Anima is what allows [players](/srd/glossary#term-player) to advance their [tier](/srd/heroes/creation#term-tier), overcome [skill challenges](/srd/discovery/skill-challenges), and save themselves from [True Death](/srd/anima/true-death).  In Last Odyssey, for a Hero to earn Anima, their player must initiate a _<dfn id = "term-scene">Scene</dfn>._  A Scene is a dramatic cutscene that somehow either directly or indirectly contextualizes their decision and its results.  To begin, the player must name the outcome their character is afraid or anxious will happen.  During the Scene, the player earning the Anima will be the Scene's main protagonist, and the other players will serve as the main supporting cast, taking on the roles of supporting characters or parts of the Scene itself, such as the lighting, the camera, or the music.  The GM is then the one to fill any extra parts if needed.

Each player may initiate a Scene once per game [session](/srd/glossary#term-session), although they can participate in as many Scenes as they like in supporting roles.  Scenes can be as abstract or concrete as Heroes want, ranging from childhood flashbacks to confessions of love to arguments with God or with a pantheon of gods, but they always begin with a character choosing to risk something valuable to them, whether that be a Relationship, a beloved object, an occupation, a title, or even their sense of themselves, and end with the outcome of that risk.  How exactly what the player was putting at risk permanently changes depends on what was being risked in the first place.  For example, if the Hero is risking their honor as a warrior, then the result of the outcome die determines whether or not their honor is tarnished.  The notable exception to this is if the Hero's life was at risk, in which case they will experience True Death.  In this case, players may spend 3 Anima they had prior to the Anima they would earn from risking their life in order to save their character, but not the Anima their character would have earned from risking their life during the Scene.

## Ending a Scene

A Scene ends once sufficient context for the central character's sacrifice is established, at which point every player in the supporting cast will accumulate a single Anima, and the main character of the scene will accumulate 1-3 Anima depending on what they risked.  In general, the worse the possible outcome, the more Anima they earn.  Then, the players are free to distribute the total Anima they earned during a Scene between all of the characters at the table as they like.  Any remaining Anima in excess of their maximum is taken by the GM, and either disappears or is given to one of the campaign's Antagonists.  Once the scene is over, the GM casts the [outcome die](/srd/glossary#term-outcome-die).  If the result is a 5 or below, the outcome that the Hero was afraid of comes to pass, while if the result is above a 5 the thing that the player risked may remain as it was if this is what they desire.

## What Counts as a Scene?

Because Scenes are special forms of story resolution, they cannot trigger as a part of [combat](/srd/combat), or any other structured form of task resolution.  For example, if a character is doing something that counts as a skill challenge, they cannot also earn Anima.  With this in mind, there are five scenarios which are always valid opportunities for a Scene:
*  When a character puts their life at risk for something important to them, they will earn 5 Anima.  Characters without an [Aspiration](/srd/heroes/creation#term-aspiration) may not do this.
*  When a character puts one of their [Relationships](/srd/heroes/creation#term-relationship) at risk for something important to them, they will earn 1-3 Anima.
*  When a character puts one of their [Aspirations](/srd/heroes/creation#term-aspiration) at risk for something important to them, they will earn 1-3 Anima.
*  When a character puts something important to them at risk for the sake of one of their Relationships, they will earn 1-3 Anima.
*  When a character puts something important to them at risk for the sake of one of their Aspirations, they will earn 1-3 Anima.

Players are always allowed to count Aspirations and Relationships as things that are important to their character for the sake of earning Anima.  If something is important to their character but is not a listed Aspiration or Relationship, then whether they can earn Anima by putting it at risk or by putting something at risk for the sake of it is a matter of [GM](/srd/glossary#term-gm) [fiat](/srd/glossary#term-fiat).  Here are some possibilities for what counts as important to a character:
*  Reputation with a [faction](/srd/intro/advice/worldbuilding#term-faction), [settlement](/srd/exploration/settlements), or important person.
*  Wealth, power, prestige, or social standing, so long as it goes beyond their immediate personal possessions.
*  Important attributes that don't have to do with adventuring, such as a beautiful face or noble bearing.

## Example Scenes
*  The [party](/srd/glossary#term-party) has managed to seal the Moon Dragon with a ritual that will send it forward 10,000 years into the future.  Unfortunately, one of them needs to stay behind to ensure that the ritual is a success.  The player whose character stays behind casts the outcome die.  If the result is a 5 or below, their character dies and the party earns 5 Anima.  If the result is above a 5, the player can choose whether or not their character dies.  If they live, the party also earns 5 Anima.
*  A character is called upon to violate one of the central tenets of their faith, and therefore risk excommunication, in order to save their younger sister.  The player in question casts the outcome die.  If the result is equal to or below a 5, their fears are realized, and the church publicly condemns their actions.  If the result is above a 5, the player can choose the outcome of their own actions.  Either way, the player generates 3 Anima, and their participating co-players accumulate 1 each.
*  A character needs to leave home in order to continue on their [adventure](/srd/glossary#term-adventure).  However, this also means leaving their overprotective mother.  When they confront their mother, they cast the outcome die to determine if they can decide their reaction or not.  One of the other players elects to play their mother during the Scene, resulting in the central character earning 2 Anima and the supporting character earning 1.
*  One of the characters in the party wants to become famous, and decides to take credit for slaying a monster that someone else slayed instead.  The player in question casts the outcome die to determine if that character is angry about it.  If the result is above a 5, they are able to choose the [NPC's](/srd/glossary#term-npc) reaction.  In either case, they earn 1 Anima.